A significant amount of research has been completed in the field of control optimization schemes. Several different approaches including direct search methods, non-linear programming, genetic algorithms, and artificial neural networks have been suggested. Optimizations have been completed at all levels of the HVAC system: Zone, AHU, and Plant.  
When discussing optimization, it is important to be clear on what is meant by Controls Optimization. When discussing the subject with a controls engineer, they will likely be analyzing parameters such as the settling time, overshoot, and rise time --- dynamic parameters.  In contrast, this research focused more on the optimization of the steady-state behavior of the system. 
Since the time constant of AHU dynamics is on the order of minutes and the time constant of the thermal loads on the building are on the order of minutes to hours, it is appropriate to focus on the steady state behavior of AHUs.
Ke and Mumma were one of the first to attempt to balance the benefits of raising the supply air temperature with the penalties associated with increased fan energy and decreased dehumidification potential . This paper was limited in the fact that it made no discussion on actual implementation. The simulated results showed that optimizing the balance between fan, cooling, and reheat energy resulted in approximately 6% energy savings annually versus a fixed supply air temperature setpoint. They showed that the benefit was most promising in the more temperate weather when the VAV system was running above the minimum primary airflow. The proposed work would not only be optimizing the supply air temperature, but also the fan static pressure setpoint.   
Wang and Song also balanced supply air temperature with fan power and included economizer control. They found energy savings reaching up to 90% under the specific outdoor air conditions and space loads in their simulation. The universal control sequence they proposed relied on an outside air temperature sensor, supply air temperature sensor, and supply air flow sensor. A limitation of this work was the assumption that the terminal units did not have reheat. It is well known though that terminal unit reheat energy can be a significant contributor to energy consumption and the reduction of reheat is often the source of significant energy and money savings in existing building commissioning.  
Qin completed a dissertation in 2014 entitled, "A Data-Driven Approach for System Approximation and Set Point Optimization, With a Focus in HVAC Systems". The focus of this work was related to the programming of thermostats in residential homes and did not cover any buildings in the commercial sector. The control responses for the rooms were being optimized and not the temperature setpoints of the rooms.  
Huh and Brandemuehl optimized the setpoint for hot and humid climates . The most significant limitation of this work was that it was heavily focused on a DX unit that would be common to a retail or supermarket and was also focused on only a hot and humid climate.  Engdahl and Johansson also devoted investigation into the optimization of the supply air temperature setpoint in a VAV system Paulus, but only studied AHUs with 100% outside air. 
While the focus of this proposal is on air handling units, the research regarding the optimization of central plants should not be ignored . At the plant level, Braun has completed a great deal of research \cite{braun1990, Braun2007RP1252, Braun2007HybridCooling, Braun2007GeneralControl}. He has investigated other optimizations, such as ones for night precooling with packaged rooftop systems. Crowther and Furlong showed that advanced optimization controls for chiller-tower condenser-pump systems could make a 5-8% improvement in annual energy use . Henze has also been active in optimizing thermal storage systems Paulus along with Kintner-Meyer and Emery. Lu et al. also focused on the optimization of the entire HVAC system, plant, and building, in a series of papers. \cite{LuLu2004, LuLu2005Part1, LuLu2005Part2, LuLu2005HVACSystemOptimization}. 
United States patents have even been written on the topic of HVAC optimization. Cascia has a patent on optimal control for a cooling and heating plant with DDC control Paulus and Seem has a patent that describes the strategy to optimally control an air side economizer . 
Numerous other researchers have thoroughly covered many aspects of an optimally operating HVAC system, which is not limited to \cite{Gruber2014AlternativeBuildings,Cho2009Single-ductOptimization,Nassif2005,Zaheer-uddin2000OptimalBuildings,Wang2000Model-basedAlgorithm,Henze2003EvaluationSystems,Liu2006ExperimentalFoundation, Zheng1996, Ning2010Neuro-optimalSystem,Atthajariyakul2004,Cui2004,XuXinhua2009,SunZhongwei2011,Mumma1997EnergyControl,Mossolly-Ghali-Ghaddar_2009_Energy}.  Wang and Ma provided a comprehensive review of supervisory control research. This literature is limited in regards to efficient methods of rapid implementation. The proposed research also presents a different optimization methodology that focuses on the use BAS trend data paired with small, calibrated, first-principle models. 
There are many different networking and communication levels and protocols related to buildings. Kastner, Neugschwandtner, and Soucek et al. provided a summary of the different systems that exist in buildings . An understanding of the different levels (described as management, automation, and field by Paulus) is important for developing any automated system. The most important open systems related to building automation include BACnet, LonWorks, EIB/KNX. Other important and relative standards, protocols, and technologies are shown in Table 1.
Project Haystack is an important open source initiative that is looking to bring specific naming conventions to building operational data (project-haystack.org). It accomplishes this at a more abstract level than BACnet, LonWorks, and EIB/KNX, using lexical rules. Before data from sensors in buildings can be used effectively, an "association" of the data to an HVAC object (say data being associated with an air temperature sensor located in a specific air handling unit) needs to occur. In order to create an environment where an intelligent building makes sense, raw numeric data needs to have extensive meta-data to give it context. This can be related to engineering units, what piece of equipment the data belongs to, the hierarchy of equipment and relationships to one another, and other modifiers. 
Not surprisingly, the goal of any controlled system is to operate optimally. It is to be  expected that there would be a wealth of literature on the optimization of all different components in a particular HVAC system. Any optimization problem has objectives and constraints. Many different objective functions and constraints to optimization problems in HVAC have been proposed. Numerous different optimization techniques and methods have been implemented and analyzed by different researchers. 
However, there are several limitations and deficiencies in the optimization literature. Not all authors have focused on the scalability of different optimization methodologies. Presently it is not feasible to implement complicated data-mining algorithms on every individual BAS or controller, partly due to installation time and partly due to the lack of facilities managers that have the necessary training to understand the algorithms and that can keep the system running properly. Facility managers already have difficulties in maintaining the most basic HVAC systems. 
Many of the techniques proposed in the literature also are dependent on sensors or information that are currently unavailable in typical commercial HVAC set-ups. For large-scale implementation, a methodology must use the minimum number of trends to complete useful optimization.
For an individual system, there are more than enough well documented and effective optimization methods and algorithms. Yet very few buildings in practice have these optimizations in place because the other numerous challenges have not been fully solved. These challenges include complexity in implementing with different BAS vendors, training a staff to understand the logic behind the optimizations, and simply the technician effort to install and setup implementations.
This research proposes its own intuitive optimization method based on small first-principle models using historical data to calibrate that is designed to efficient in scaling. The research investigates how to use current communication protocols with BAS systems and implementable methodologies to apply a single set of optimization logic and code to many and varied air handling units. 
Unfortunately, at the current time, it is uncommon to have all the explicit sensors available for all portions of the HVAC system.  It is rare to have the capability to sub-meter the energy use of all the individual components including the fans, cooling coils, and heating coils. 
The following suggestions are based on the data for over \num{150000} trends stored in Implementer along with personal experience. Implementer is a web application developed by the Energy Systems Laboratory that aids engineers in the collection and analysis of trend data from buildings.  The statistical results presented use data til April 13, 2016. The total number of configured single duct AHUs at this time was 846. The number of trends that existed in these 846 containers was 11,806, or approximately 14 trends per AHU. Table 1 gives the percentage breakdown of the types of points that we have seen in current Implementer projects. Note that due to special Implementer considerations, the occurrence percentage should not be evaluated directly (due to some projects not being properly set up at all). The relative relationship between trend types is the more significant result.  
If the building in question consumes district chilled and hot water for thermal HVAC processes, the importance of additional trends is lessened since it is clear that the chilled water is used to meet the cooling load of the building and similarly for the hot water. The electricity use is then left to lights and equipment, along with the fan energy.
However, if natural gas and electricity are the only energy supply types for the building, additional information coming from trend data becomes more important for disaggregating the energy end uses. 
It can normally be assumed that monthly utility bills are available.  Having a smaller time interval on the utility data can also aid significantly in the calibration. Daily data can help aid in discriminating weekday/weekend profiles, while hourly data can aid in exposing the diurnal cycle of the building. 
In all cases, having the fan power trended will aid in the energy use breakdown, as this immediately provides information regarding this portion of the electricity use.  In many cases, it is acceptable to combine lighting energy and the non-HVAC related internal electricity use together. 
The fan power is trended directly on less than 10% of systems in Implementer. The next best option in 15% of the cases is using the supply flow along with manufacturers specifications to estimate fan power. With the design flow values from mechanical drawings, fractional power curves based on part-load ratio can be used to estimate the fan energy use. 
The cooling energy that results from the chiller/HVAC equipment can be estimated from the air-side energy balance across the cooling coils (assuming that this building is not using individual fan coil units or rooftop units). The cooling energy is related to the supply air flow, mixed air temperature, and supply air temperature. It is also related to the mixed air humidity. 
cooling energy is related to the supply flow, and the difference between the mixed air temperature, and the supply air temperature. The supply flows can vary significantly from one air handler to another, and also under different loadings. 
The mixed air temperature is the lowest priority of the three air-side parameters for estimating the sensible cooling energy in the AHU. A reasonable estimate of the outdoor air temperature is available from local weather stations, in addition to commonly trended outdoor air temperatures at the site itself. The return air temperature in air handling units are near the space temperature setpoints. It is known that the mixed air temperature must be between the return and outdoor air temperature (if the airstreams are indeed being mixed). Without any other information, the most safe estimate for the mixed air temperature would be halfway between these two measurements. 
As an argument for the claim that mixed air temperature is the lowest priority of the 3 parameters, the difference between Mitch and 72°F for the hourly outdoor air dry-bulb temperature weather data for College Station during the year of 2015 was calculated. 1/2 of this difference would be the worst case error estimation. The median of these half-differences was 4.9°F, and the mean was 6.4°F.  These are robust estimates of the upper bounds on the error of the estimation of mixed air temperature with no guidance other than the assumption that the mixed air temperature is between the outdoor air temperature and return air temperature. With any additional information regarding the outdoor air fraction, the estimate would be even better. 
Determining the latent load across the cooling coil is difficult using air-side parameters. Humidity sensors are traditionally unreliable and two would be necessary to calculate an absolute humidity difference.
In this sense, metering the water-side parameters would be a more reliable estimator of the total cooling load, including the latent effect. However, trended water-side sensors have not been seen in the 5 years of Implementer projects.
Unless the building has some other large hot water end uses, much of the natural gas use will be directly related to heating/reheat. Electricity use will then be distributed between lights and non-HVAC equipment, fans, along with chiller/HVAC equipment. 
If the building is heated using natural gas, the natural gas consumption can be an adequate indicator of the level of reheat use in the building.  At the current time, trending all the data from terminal units is uncommon. The sensors are typically available, however, the number of terminal units and large amount of data to be handled are issues that cause projects to decline to pursue the collection of the terminal unit data.
Having the supply air temperature and supply air flow is important because it not only helps fix the parameters for the cooling energy end use at the AHU but also the parameters for estimating reheat in the terminal units. If the terminal units are aggregated together, with the knowledge of the total flow and supply air temperature, along with potentially having measured natural gas use, the only parameter left is the discharge temperature to the zones. 
1. Supply air temperature -- This parameter is crucial in estimating both the sensible cooling energy and the reheat energy of the system. 
1. Fan Power -- Directly returns the energy end use for fans.
1. Supply air flow -- A key parameter in estimating the flow both at the AHU and the total of which is going to the terminal units, affecting both the cooling and reheat energy end uses.
1. Outdoor air flow -- Important in fixing the ventilation load at the AHU.
1. Terminal unit flows -- Helps set the minimum primary air flow parameter, a sensitive parameter affecting the reheat. 
1. Terminal unit discharge temperatures -- Aids the estimation of zone reheat. Although this trend may not be as useful if the terminal units bring in plenum air for mixing. 
1. Space temperature -- Defines the zone temperatures. 
1. Mixed air temperature -- Aids in the determination of the sensible and latent cooling load and estimation of the outdoor air fraction
1. Return air temperature -- Aids in the estimation of the outdoor air fraction or ventilation load.
1. VSD speed, VFD frequency, etc. -- Indicator of the part-load ratio for the equipment, which may be used in the estimation of fan energy. 
1. Preheat Temperature -- Sets this parameter in the model, aiding the estimation of the heating end uses.
Sensors that may be of medium usefulness:
1. Fan Status or occupied/unoccupied status -- Can give indication about the runtimes and schedules of the building.
1. Supply air static pressure -- Unless the precise location of the sensor and the overall duct layout is known, it is of little use in calculating the fan power. It does provide an indication of whether the fan is on or off which is useful for determining AHU schedules.
1. Various Setpoints -- In a well-controlled building, ideally, the value of the controlled sensor will be equivalent to the setpoint.  However, the setpoint trends may not represent reality, especially under conditions of control overrides or other faults.
1. Return air relative humidity -- May be an indicator of the level of latent load in the building. If the return air absolute humidity levels are relatively dry, the latent load may be zero or negligible. 
1. Outdoor air temperatures -- In some circumstances, the temperature of the fresh air may differ from the outdoor air temperature in the local community, in which the local measurement will be a better indicator of the temperature of the air that is entering the AHU from the outdoors. However, the local weather station measurements are typically much more reliable and trustworthy than the sensors maintained at the site, and this needs to be taken into consideration.
Sensors that are commonly trended and are not useful in estimating the energy use breakdown of a building:
1. Return air COMitch -- Not directly related to measuring the energy use.
1. Damper commands -- Since duct layout and fluid flow models are not feasible, the damper commands do not provide information towards the calculation of the energy use. 
1. Chilled water valve/Hot water valve -- It is the actuator for controlling the supply air temperature, but does not provide information related to energy use.
