The National Center for Therapeutics Manufacturing (NCTM) building was used as a test bed for the methodology. NCTM is a building located on the campus of Texas A&M University, in College Station, Texas. 
The National Center for Therapeutics Manufacturing (NCTM) combines the educational and manufacturing focuses of the biopharmaceutical industry.  The NCTM building is approximately 10 meters with nearly 10 meters of educational facilities that include wet labs, culture facilities, large lecture halls, and a mock current Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) training suite. Around 10 meters are on the first level and 10 meters are on the second level. 
The cGMP Suite contains modern biopharmaceutical manufacturing equipment that students can use to learn industry practices. The wet labs are equipped with chemical fume hoods and the necessary electronic equipment for following standard operating procedures used in the biopharmaceutical industry. The lecture halls seat up to 120 students and have large floor to ceiling windows. There is also an Apple Computer laboratory with 48 workstations on the second floor. 
On the academic side, three dedicated outdoor air handling units (OAHU) serve seven child air handling units. Two of the air handling units are constant speed, and the others are variable air volume. OAHU 1-1 serves its wet lab and also feeds into AHU 1-1 and AHU 1-2. OAHU 1-2 serves AHU 1-3 and 1-4 on the first floor. OAHU 2-1 serves three air handlers on the second floor, AHU 2-1, 2-2, and 2-3. 
Various specifications for the air handling units are shown in Tables 1 through 1.
This document focuses on the academic side of the building since Utilities and Energy services with Texas A&M University are only allowed to make immediate changes to the HVAC system on this side. In summary, the relevant parameters concerning NCTM are that it houses several biopharmaceutical labs, it has an academic side that can be immediately changed and a manufacturing side that cannot be immediately changed, and relies on dedicated outdoor air handling units to pretreat outdoor air. 
Figure 1 through Figure 1 show the respective areas that the air handling units serve. 
On the academic side, there are a total of 10 series fan powered terminal units on the first floor and 18 on the second floor.  Table 1 shows the design flowrates and type of space served for each of the terminal units. 
It is critical to have an understanding of how the current controls are operating using data, relying on more than just control code. In practice, this will normally require that an engineer verifies both the control code along with the real measured performance.
Implementer can ease the difficulty in this analysis by producing certain plots en mass for terminal units.  Figure 1 shows the results of temperature rise within the terminal unit, versus the part-load ratio of the terminal unit (assuming the design specifications for the design flow). From these types of plots, the minimum primary air flow setpoint can quickly be visually determined.
From the data, it appears that the majority of the terminal units in NCTM are operating with 30% as the minimum flow rate. There are a few terminal units that are set to values less than this. Table 1 shows the estimated minimum percent flows based on data from February 1, 2016, through May 1, 2016.  
Figure 1 shows the available points for the series fan powered terminal units at NCTM from a BAS graphic.
The points include
1. Primary air flow
1. Damper command
1. Discharge air temperature 
1. Heating coil valve command
This section investigates the feasibility of estimating Mitch based on historical data. Figure 1 shows an example of an AHU in which Mitch does not change significantly throughout time. Figure 1 and 1 both show 90 days of data from March 14, 2016 to June 12, 2016. 
In the case of Figure 1, Mitch is less constant, but still appears to be a function of Mitch as a first order approximation. 
The result of a nearest neighbor approach is shown in Figure 1 and 1. The algorithm looked back in history (at least a day before) under the following parameters:
1. The same day of the week
1. Same hour of day plus or minus 1 hr.
1. Same Mitch plus or minus 3°F
1. Searching backward incrementally until 30 data points found
The median of the found data points is the resulting prediction. The following plots show the model fits for the different air handling units at NCTM. The data covers a period of 180 days. Figures 1 and 1 show that the prediction algorithm can adequately handle the differences from when the air handling unit is on as well as off. The significant amount of spread in the mixed air temperature is due to data in which the air handler turns off and is allowed to drift, typically to a higher temperature in the climate of College Station. 
Figures 1 through 1 show the model fits ignoring times when the air handling units are off, weekends and holidays, and times between 6:00 PM and 8:00 AM.
The sensitivity to the "nearest neighbor" parameters was tested. The parameter values were varied as shown in Table 1.
With three parameters and 3 different variations for each, this resulted in 27 test cases. The results of this testing are shown in Table 1. TS stands for timestamps, and is related to time of day threshold. Since the data was on 15 minute intervals, a 1 timestamp threshold implies a threshold of plus or minus 15 minutes and a 4 timestamp threshold implies a threshold of plus or minus 60 minutes. The best model fit used a timestamp threshold of plus or minus 60 minutes, Mitch for Mitch, and 15 data points. The worst case was using plus or minus 15 minutes, Mitch, and 30 data points. 
The model was insensitive to the parameters. Because Fahrenheit is not on a ratio scale, that is, having a meaningful zero, the typical goodness-of-fit parameter coefficient of variation of the root mean squared error (RMSE) has less meaning.  Therefore, instead of using the mean as the normalization parameter in the CV-RMSE metric, the range or the spread of the original data was used. It is denoted as CV-RMSE* for the remainder of this document. 
The average CV-RMSE* ranged from 8.97% to 10.75%. The models with the lowest CVs had the largest range in the timestamp and Mitch threshold. This observation is an indication that using more recent data was more valuable than using data from conditions matching more closely. 
A graphical view of the results in order of the best set parameters to the worst set of parameters is shown in Figure 1. 
Under certain assumptions, an estimation for the plenum air temperature for the series fan powered terminal units is possible. If the terminal unit is modeled as a simple mixing problem, the plenum air temperature will be 
Since Mitch is a function of 4 variables, it is important to consider the uncertainty in the estimation. Clearly, when Mitch is low, assumed to be equivalent to Mitch, the uncertainty in  Mitch grows significantly, and when the flow is equal to zero Mitch is undefined. 
Using the Kline-McKlintock formulation of uncertainty, the uncertainty of Mitch is 
So for an example, if the following arbitrary but reasonable parameters are used, 
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
1. Mitch
Equation 1 becomes which results in a final uncertainty of 10 meters, which is nearly four times larger than the initially assumed uncertainties for the temperatures (10 meters). When Mitch is reduced even further, this uncertainty grows substantially.  
For further analysis, Equation 1 can be manipulated into a simpler form.  The first substitution assumes the uncertainty for Mitch and Mitch are taken to be the same and constant at a value of Mitch. The uncertainty for the flows can be done on a percent basis, (Mitch for example, and that percentage, a value from 0 to 1 can be denoted as Mitch).  The difference between Mitch and Mitch can be replaced by Mitch.  The final substitution is that the flows for Mitch and Mitch are taken to be a fraction of the total flow.  Mitch is defined to be the fraction of the total flow that comes from the primary stream, a value between 0 and 1. Therefore, and With these substitutions, the total uncertainty for Mitch is 
Various combinations of values and the resulting uncertainty in Mitch are shown in Figure 1 through 1. The y-axis is normalized to the static uncertainty in the other temperatures, Mitch, which is the uncertainty for both Mitch and Mitch. 
What the plots show is that the fraction of primary flow, Mitch, has to be less than 40% is most cases in order to have an uncertainty in Mitch that is less than double the uncertainty in Mitch and Mitch (2 on the normalized y-axis). 
As an example as to how unstable the calculation for the plenum temperature is, Figure 1 shows the calculation for FPVAV-1-9 over the period from February 1, 2016 - May 1, 2016. The calculated values are unrealistic ranging from -1,500°F to 1,500°F. The reason for this is made clear in a time series plot of the flows related to the terminal unit. As shown in Figure 1, for this particular terminal unit, the primary flow is either near zero or design. At times, the measured flow is also above the design specification, making the plenum flow calculation zero. When the plenum flow is calculated to be zero, the plenum temperature calculation becomes undefined.
Using the assumptions that the uncertainty in the flow was 100 CFM and the uncertainty in the temperature measurements was 1°F, the plenum temperature was recorded and plotted versus Mitch from October 6, 2015, to September 12, 2016, ignoring items that appear in Table 1. The distribution statistics for each terminal unit is found in Table 1.  The table is listed in ascending order by the median of the plenum temperature calculated.
Note that the percentage of ignored points is below 96% for only 4 terminal units.  The majority of the points are ignored because the uncertainty in the calculation is above the 2°F threshold that was arbitrarily chosen.  In fact, at no point was the uncertainty below 2°F for FPVAV-2-7.  The median plenum temperature ranges from 58.8°F for FPVAV-1-8 to 75.6°F for FPVAV-1-6.
Another interesting way to examine the difference between the plenum temperature and the zone temperature is to plot the estimated reheat in the terminal unit when the reheat valve is closed.  Ideally, the amount of reheat would be at or near zero. 
If the plenum temperature is assumed to be equal to the zone temperature then an estimate of the mixed air temperature in the terminal unit would be and the reheat energy could be estimated by
Figures 1 through 1 show the reheat energy as determined by Equation 1. They are from the period of February 1, 2016, through May 1, 2016.  Timestamps during weekends, times between 5:00 PM and 9:00 AM, and when the corresponding reheat valve command is Mitch were ignored. Again, ideally, the reheat value would be exactly zero.
Figure 1 shows an example of where the assumption appears to hold reasonably well.  The median of the data set is near 10 meters. Is should be noted that Equation 1 does not make a distinction between heating from the heating coils and heating from fan.  So the 10 meters could be due to the fan in the air stream. 
Figure 1 shows a case in which there is either constant reheat or the actual plenum temperature is lower than the zone temperature that was assumed.
Figure 1 shows a case in which the reheat is estimated to be a negative value, which likely means that the actual plenum temperature is greater than the assumed plenum temperature equal to the zone temperature. 
Another way to view the accuracy and importance of the plenum temperature on the amount of reheat necessary is to look at the difference between the discharge temperature and the predicted mixed air temperature in the terminal unit under conditions when the reheat valve is closed.  During these times the values should be nearly equal, and the difference should be near zero. 
Under the assumption that the plenum temperature is equal to the corresponding zone temperature, it does not appear as if this assumption is valid for the corresponding energy calculations. Figure 1 shows as much as an 10 meters difference. Because the value is positive, this means that the plenum temperature is likely higher than the assumed zone temperature, assuming that the measured discharge temperature is more accurate that the estimation of the plenum temperature. 
The opposite case can be seen with TU-2-15, as shown in Figure 1 In this case, the values are all negative, indicating that the plenum temperature is lower than the zone temperature. The plots are from the same period and cover a broad range of outdoor air temperatures from 10 meters to 10 meters. Both plots do appear linear with regards to the PLR of the terminal unit. This linearity indicates that there is some relationship with the plenum temperature and the amount of conditioned air coming from the parent air handling unit.
This linear dependence on the PLR does not carry to all the terminal units. As a counterexample to the previous plots, FPVAV-2-10 has a zig-zag pattern. 
An important factor in the optimization methodology is the prediction of the zone loads at a given time, without access to current live sensor information. 
Before analyzing the prediction ability of different zone loads, it is important to gather insight into the nature of the calculated variable that is proposed to be used as the surrogate for zone load.   
If the zone loads are being met and steady-state conditions are assumed, the sensible zone load will be where Mitch is in units of meters, Mitch is in CFM, and the temperatures are in meters.
As a result of the dynamics of how terminal units are controlled in reality, the estimated zone load can vary back and forth, while the true zone load is expected to be a smoother function. Figure 1 shows how the estimated zone load using Equation 1 can change directionality several times over the course of a day. The zone load for terminal unit FPVAV-1-7 typically varied from 6,000 BTU/hr to 20,000 BTU/hr over the course of the week from June 6, 2016, to June 11, 2016.
Figure 1 shows another example of how the estimated zone load may vary throughout a typical week. Figure 1 shows the zone load for FPVAV-2-2, which experiences a significant load compared to the other terminal units at NCTM. The zone load varies from near 10,000 BTU/hr to near 50,000 BTU/hr at its peak.
With Figure 1 as evidence, it is clear that the "true" zone load cannot be reasonably estimated with the trend data that is available in typical BAS systems.  However, the ratio of magnitudes of the load from zone to zone can still be inferred and be useful in improving the energy efficiency of the system.  
Figure 1 shows an example of the zone load plotted against outdoor air dry-bulb temperature. Notice that the load is not a well-defined function of Mitch. This turns out to be the case for many of the internal zones, which have a higher dependence on the time of day parameters. 
Figure 1 shows the zone load for FPVAV-2-9 versus Mitch. FPVAV-2-9 serves only internal zones, and the load only ranges from approximately 10 meters to 10 meters.
The statistics related to the predictions of the zone loads for data ranging from October 6, 2015, to June 1, 2016, are given in Table 1.
The highest errors in the prediction were for FPVAV-1-4, the zone that has the highest overall zone load in the building, by a significant margin. It has estimated loads near 50,000 BTU/hr.
An interesting pattern was that the initial prediction routine overpredicted the zone load when the zone load was closer to the heating range and underpredicted the zone load during times of high cooling load. This bias was seen in every terminal unit in the building, and this bias occurred with both the largest and smallest terminal units. Figures 1 through 1 show examples of this phenomenon. This is because the median of sub-sets of data was used for the prediction. The method will always underpredict the highest value and overpredict the lowest value.  The date period analyzed was from March 1, 2016, to August 1, 2016, ignoring when the AHUs were off, federal holidays and weekends, and hours from 5 PM to 9 AM. 
An analysis was also completed regarding the optimal parameters for the "nearest neighbor" approach. The three parameters for the function are the time of day threshold, the outdoor air temperature threshold, and the number of data points to use.
Three different tests cases for each variable were used. The time of day threshold was adjusted from 1 timestamp away, 2 timestamps away, and 4 timestamps away. For 15 minute interval data, this means that the threshold was 15 minutes, 30 minutes, and 1 hour. 
The outdoor air temperature threshold was tested at 10 meters, 10 meters, and 10 meters. The number of data points used in the median was 15, 30, and 45. 
The objective function for these tests was the average root mean squared error (RMSE) divided by the range of the calculated zone loads for all the terminal units in NCTM, which is defined as CV-RMSE*.
Note that for data sets such as zone load which can be both above and below zero, that the coefficient of variation using the mean as the normalization factor, a commonly used metric in evaluating model fits, can be arbitrarily high because the mean can be close to zero (implying that the zone load is both positive and negative). 
The tests were done for data from January 1st, 2016 through January 1st, 2017. Times when the air handling units were off and the first and last hour of operation, weekends,  and federal holidays were all ignored. 
The results show that the goodness-of-fit metrics were insensitive to the various parameters. In addition, the results show that looser thresholds, which results in more recent data being used, gave the best model fits. The best average CV-RMSE* was 11.6% was under the conditions of thresholds of plus or minus one hour, 10 meters, and using 45 data points.  The worst models had an average CV-RMSE* of 13.5%, for the thresholds of plus or minus 15 minutes, 10 meters, and 45 data points. The rest of the tests are also shown in Table 1.
A main takeaway of the tests, however, was that result were insensitive to the parameters. This means that the parameters may be adjusted for benefits in other areas such as performance. By having large thresholds and less data points, less historical data needs to be searched, and the time to complete the algorithm is reduced.
A plot of these results in order of predictive ability is shown in Figure 1. 
The critical zone/damper could be used to determine the static pressure setpoint that can be used to supply the desired flows found from the optimization. An important consideration in the methodology is checking how well this assumption holds. Data from NCTM can be used to test the validity of the approach.
The following figures show the maximum damper position of the terminal units for each of the air handlers during the month of April 2016. During this time, for AHU-2-1 and AHU-2-2, there was no time in which a terminal unit damper was fully open which indicates that there is potential for the supply air static pressure setpoints of these AHUs to be reduced.  
An investigation into the critical zones based on historical data was completed. 15 minute interval data from January 1, 2016, through June 1, 2016, was used to check which damper positions were most open at a given timestamp. Table 1 shows the results of this analysis. In all five of the applicable air handling units, there is a damper that is critical at least 59% of the time. 
In the simplified analysis and modeling such as being proposed, it would be ideal if the specifications in the mechanical drawings can be used directly.  One important parameter is the design flow rate for the terminal unit.  Table 1 shows the design flow rates for all the series fan powered terminal units in the NCTM building.  The results show that the design specifications were sufficiently accurate.  All data that were available at the time (October 6, 2015, through June 7, 2016) were analyzed to capture a large number of timestamps (over 22,000 timestamps). Over half the absolute differences are less than 10 meters.   There are several reasons for potential differences between the maximum measured flow and the design flow rates in the mechanical drawings.  It may be the case that the terminal unit was oversized and the design flow rate was never necessary. There may be bias in the flow rate measurements.  
The largest percent difference and absolute difference between the measured maximum flow rate and design value was for FPVAV-1-9. The difference was due to less than 15 outliers in the data (out of over 20,000 data points in total), and if they were to be removed, the maximum is in line with the design value of 1,200 CFM for the vast majority of the data, as seen in Figure 1. 
The methods described in the previous sections were used to determine the optimal supply air temperature for various air handling units at the NCTM building.  Figure 1 shows the results for AHU-2-3 during the work week from Monday, November 7, 2016, through Friday, November 11, 2016.  During that week, the actual Mitch hovered between 10 meters and 10 meters. The optimal Mitch was predicted using different parameters for the simple fan curve exponent and plenum temperature.  The optimization was completed using a fan exponent of 2 and 3, and the plenum temperature was assumed to be the room temperature or assumed to be the static median values shown in Table 1.  Notice that even with the fan curve exponent varying from 2 to 3, the optimal Mitch is approximately 66°F, 7°F higher than the current operation. 
It is also apparent that for this case study that the optimal supply air temperature is near the maximum of the search range.  The maximum possible Mitch searched is the minimum between the Mitch and the minimum calculated discharge temperature. The Mitch cannot be above the Mitch because that would require heating in the air handling unit, and cannot be above the minimum calculated discharge temperature because then that particular zone would be starved for cooling capacity.  For the second floor air handling units, the minimum discharge temperature is always less than the mixed air temperature indicating that cooling will always be required.  
Figure 1 shows the results for the same computations as Figure 1, but for AHU-2-1.  AHU-2-1 has 3 terminal units supporting a computer lab with higher measured loads than the rest of the second floor.  The Mitch is also shown in Figure 1 for reference. The optimal Mitch appears to be higher than the current operation, although not as much as the difference seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1 shows the results for AHU-2-2.  In this case, the actual operation is near the estimated optimal Mitch.
The potential for energy savings at the NCTM building was investigated for the second floor AHUs. 
Energy savings were estimated for a period from June 1st , 2016 to January 1st, 2017.  Weekends, times when the AHUs were off, federal holidays, and times from 5:00 PM to 9:00 AM were all ignored. 
Also, since the estimation of the amount of reheat in terminal units had a high uncertainty level, it was decided to ignore times in which at least one of the reheat valves in the terminal units was open. Because most of the necessary reheat can be accomplished by mixing plenum air in the series fan powered terminal units, this only removes a small portion of the data. In this sense, the only components to the AHU energy were the cooling energy at the cooling coil and the fan energy. 
To provide a sense of the sensitivity to the assumed parameters in the optimization, savings were determined using different exponents ranging from 2 to 3 for the PLR curve, along with the plenum temperature assumed to be the corresponding room temperature and the estimated constant temperature shown in Table 1. 
Based on the optimal supply air temperatures shown in Section 1, the potential savings in AHU-2-1 and AHU-2-2 will be small since the systems are already operating near optimal. However, the savings potential in AHU-2-3 appeared promising since there was approximately a 10 meters difference between the operating supply air temperature and the predicted optimal supply air temperature. 
Figure 1 shows the difference in the combined energy of the fan and cooling from actual to optimal. Periods in which reheat was occurring were ignored in the analysis. As expected, the energy use has a dependence on Mitch. The optimal profile has a 3-Parameter cooling shape, as described in . 
The energy savings are primarily caused by increasing the supply air temperature. There already was a reset programmed for AHU-2-3, but the optimal reset would, in general, have a higher Mitch. 
A first comment is that it appears plausible that the "zone load" can be reasonably estimated to provide useful optimization.  In fact, the general relationship in the size of the thermal loads of the different zones is more important than the precise value, of which the data available is not capable of estimating. 
The second is that the design specifications from mechanical drawings can be used as the first approximation for flows and power.  There was general agreement between the terminal unit design flows and the actual maximum realized flows at NCTM, as seen in Table 1. 
A third conclusion is that the uncertainty in the optimal Mitch is small enough that in most cases, the current operation at NCTM does not fall within the bounds.  In the cases shown in Figure 1 through Figure 1, the optimal Mitch was higher than the current operation. 
